Good day I'm Norman Wildberger so this is a
joyous occasion we've now reached number 200
in this series on the foundations of mathematics
today we're going to look at what we might call
a mission impossible the task of factorizing our
favorite big number Z into prime factors so that
is the number 10 triangle 10 plus 23 and if you've
been watching at all any of the recent videos in
this series you'll be rather familiar with this
number but let me remind everybody it's a use of
a hyper operation 10 triangle tended means 10 to
the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to
the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 string of 10
tens each an exponent of the previous one plus 23
this is a humongously big number and we claim that
this thing does not have a prime factorization so
this is in direct opposition to the standard
fundamental unique factorization theorem also
called the fundamental theorem of arithmetic so
in this video what we want to do is we want to
talk about particular the problems with said so
first of all we'll talk about the difficulty of
even discussing or defining prime numbers in
the range of zedd we're going to have a very
good look at factorizing things of the form 10 to
the N plus 23 I want us to get a really good solid
intuition for what typically happens when we look
at factoring these kinds of things especially as n
gets bigger we'll only be able to go very very
short distance up to Z but still we'll make a
little bit of progress to get some intuition and
we'll see that the difficulty involves not just
getting prime factors but also in obtaining the
quotients of those prime factors and it's really
the blow out in complexity that ends up defeating
us and this will really bring to a or I think this
fork in the road that mathematics is going to have
to deal with all right that computational reality
goes in this direction and idealism goes in a
different direction we're gonna really have to
face the music here and make decisions about which
way we want our subject to go so let's introduce
this rather suggestive terminology of dark numbers
which i think is amusing even though it may not
be very precise so let's talk about dark numbers
less than Z so Zed is a very big number okay and
if we think about what we were talking about when
we were discussing complexity of numbers we made
a rough estimation that if we think about the very
smallest possible cubes that we possibly could use
to write something down in say a Planck cube maybe
10 to the minus 30 or 10 to the minus 35 meters
wide very very small there are maybe around 10 to
the 200 Planck cubes something like this filling
the entire observable universe so if we imagine
that we're able to miraculously somehow write at
that infinitesimally almost infinitesimally small
scale then it gives us a kind of a bound on how
many possible expressions we could possibly even
think about writing down so let's say that po was
the for the sake of argument that our keyboard
has a thousand symbols to choose from and so we
can put any one of these a thousand symbols in
a planked cube then there will be a thousand to
the 10 to the 200 possible expressions that we
can write down filling the entire universe with
these symbols one for every little Planck cube so
of course is vastly more than we actually could do
but some kind of bound and it's easy to see that
this thing is much less than 10 triangle 4 which
is 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 okay so 10
triangle 4 is a convenient short limit on the
number of possible expressions that we can write
down in our physical observable universe and so
it follows that this is also a bound on the of
numbers that we can write down because numbers
are dust particular kinds of expressions and then
we just obviously observe that Zaid which is ten
triangle ten plus 23 is very very much bigger
than ten triangle four and so if we believe so
if we believe that there really are numbers from 1
all the way up to Zed if we believe that actually
makes sense that there are natural numbers one
two three four you can go all the way up to Zed
then it follows that the vast majority of those
numbers okay cannot be expressed in our observable
universe no matter how clever or concise you write
no matter what kind of arithmetic 'el system that
you devise because there's just at most ten
triangle four possible expressions that you can
write all together right so the vast majority of
numbers less than Zed natural numbers are lost to
us they're invisible to us we can never actually
access them we can call them dark numbers I know
this is disconcerting okay this is a strange kind
of way of thinking because it's contrary to our
usual sort of inductive idea that things just
march on pleasantly in a similar fashion to what
we're used to but this is the reality computation
reality is that most numbers if you really believe
in such things lessons that are invisible to us
of course it really the logical consequence of
this is that we should actually be skeptical about
the idea that it makes sense to talk about all the
natural numbers less than said to believe that
there are actually said of them but I hope you
can see that this problem of these dark numbers
is going to directly affect this question about
the factorize ability of Zed into primes because
if we look at all the numbers from one to Z and
what a factor this big there's going to be a lot
of prime factors typically and now we run into the
sort of unavoidable likelihood that most of those
prime factors are actually going to be in the
dark range because after all most of the numbers
from one to Z are dark numbers they're beyond us
they're too big to even write down so the primes
are also going to have that problem in fact even
to define what we mean by a prime number even in
this limited range from one to Zed is now much
more problematic than it appeared to when we first
just thinking about the little numbers so what
could it mean for a dark number to be prime let's
suppose that we're playing this game and we now
believe that there are these numbers that we can't
write down that's a dark number what does it mean
for this thing to be a product let's call this
dark number that we're considering adi kind of a
gothic d to distinguish it from the usual kinds of
natural numbers that we usually like to talk about
with nice ends or P's or cues so here we have
this gothic D it's a dark number we can't actually
write it down but we're pretending that we can
contemplate it okay what could it mean for a dark
number to be prime well the definition is that we
need to decide whether this number is divisible
by any number less than it means we have to go
through all the numbers less than D and do see
if any of them divide D but how are we going to
do that because most of these numbers that we're
considering here are also likely to be dark okay
so we can't access any of them so how do we check
whether these dark numbers that we can't access
divide D which itself we can't access so what does
it actually mean for D to be prime this is highly
problematic my computer is sitting and listening
to this conversation and it's shaking its head
saying wait a minute you know none of this makes
any sense my computer is thinking something like
sorry but if it can't be written down then it
is not a number okay maybe my computer is not
actually saying that but Computers could think
and express themselves and probably in a few more
years they'll be able to do that we'll be getting
this kind of message from our computers they'll
be telling us wait a minute what are you talking
about if you can't write something down then what
possibly are you talking about why are you doing
poetry perhaps but wait a minute Norman in modern
mathematics don't we have a lot of freedom can we
just invoke our abstract thinking and our notation
to deal with cut these kinds of things that you're
wrestling with in a very hands-off kind of fashion
for example can we just write down stuff like this
let H be the set of n natural numbers such that
n is less than or equal to Z we just write this
down this is the set of all natural numbers from
1 or actually from 0 up to Zent this notation
captures the idea and completely finesses the
issue of whether or not there are actually dark
numbers and how we deal with them if we want
to be a little bit more specific or maybe not
use such fancy kind of language we can just write
down the set 0 comma 1 comma 2 comma dot dot dot
comma Zed this invokes this idea that here in
this set are all the numbers from 0 up to set
this is not an infinite set so we're not talking
about my usual objections to infinite sets here
you can see that there's already something very
problematic with this large set because in this
range here there are these vast tracts of
numbers that we have no possible hold on
it's just a complete sea of blankness to us so
what are we talking about here but we can go
further in modern mathematics this doesn't stop
us ordinarily so we just carry on and write stuff
like this and now let's let P be the set of P
and H HS a set that we've just defined such a
P is prime bingo with one stroke like a magic
wand boom suddenly poof they're all the primes
less than that are now suddenly created out of
magic fabulous isn't it or if we want to be a
little bit less fancy and just write them down we
just go 2 3 5 7 11 13 dot up to P of Z what does
P of Zed well it's going to be the largest prime
less than Zed we're just allowed to write stuff
like this down P of Zed is the largest prime less
than set our computer would not understand any of
this incomprehensible and this is also not at all
in keeping with the approach that we have been
championing towards data structures so for us if
you want to set you are obliged to write it down
there's no three dots in the middle that obscure
all kinds of vast tracts of inaccessible objects
you're obliged to write them all down if you can
write them all down then you have the set or the
M set or the Oh set or the list and otherwise
you don't very very big difference between the
way we're trying to promote mathematics here
in this math foundation series and the standard
procedure that you find throughout the rest of
the mathematical community these days more or
less there really are very serious questions here
that people ought to ask and it's not just about
only infinite sets okay there's serious questions
just about what happens when things get big enough
once things get big enough and we don't have to
go to infinity we already run into problems our
computers run into problems and so do we okay
so let's leave this question of dark numbers
and all these sort of fanciful notions aside
and let's return to something more fundamental
and think about things from a computational point
of view let's ask rather what we can actually do
computationally solidly and having our computers
support us so that we're thinking along lines
that are parallel to what the computers are
doing not diverging in different directions
okay this is increasingly going to be a litmus
test in the mathematics of the coming century as
to whether you're on the right track or not okay
are you diverging from what your computer can do
then maybe you should think about where you're
going okay so let's return to the question of
factorizing Zed from a computational point
of view by starting from the bottom rather
than from the top okay so let's be more modest a
very good place to start let's start with a lot
simpler kind of situation and see how far we can
go towards factorizing Zed very very good powerful
idea so let's start very modestly with 10 plus
23 that factors is 3 times 11 and then let's up
the power 10 squared plus 23 factors as 3 times
41 and I'm going to go through a list of these
kinds of numbers so it's always a power of 10 plus
23 which stick to that kind of framework and see
what happens now this is very parallel to what I
was talking about sometime ago in the famous math
problem series in fact the first of that series
which was all about factorizing Zed so there's a
lot of overlap and what I'm going to do now with
that video but that's all right ok these are I
think interesting ideas that it's important that
those following this series has some intuition as
to what actually happens this is not something
that most of us have a lot of familiarity and
experience with we're quite comfortable with you
know factoring small numbers and the hundreds and
thousands but when we get to bigger numbers we
don't really have a good sense of what typically
happens what can we expect and what can we not
expect so we want to develop a little bit of into
so we're going out into the field as work to
perform some actual observations record some
things okay so various powers 10 squared plus
23 is 3 times 41 10 cubed plus 23 is 3 times 11
times 31 10 to the fourth plus 23 is 3 times
13 times 257 10 to the fifth plus 23 3 times
7 times 11 times 433 and then this one 3 times 3
3 3 3 4 1 3 times 11 times 19 times 41 times 3 89
3 times 2 2 9 3 times 14 5 37 3 times 11 squared
times 61 times 45 161 and here 10 to the 10 plus
23 3 times 13 times 29 times this prime 3 times
7 squared times 11 times this prime and 3 times
41 times 200 11 times this problem so can we
see some kind of pattern is there some kind of
predictability well obviously there's a factor
of 3 everywhere because the sum of the digits
is always 6 and if we see this 11 here we see it
in a lot of other places and it's not too hard
to notice that it seems to appear every second
one and at least here it appears twice and the
next uh factor 41 does that appear anywhere
else oh yes it appears there again how about
say a 13 that appears there and it appears there
again so maybe there's some kind of repetitive
aspect at least some kind of periodicity in here
but of course there's something also that's very
unpredictable because these bigger primes are sort
of popping up out of nowhere as it were and it's
very hard to predict you know what this prime
is if you had just up to here alright let's go
a little bit further so we'll keep this one in
mind I'll quickly go through a few more okay so
let's have a look at some further ones ten cubed
plus twenty three we have this factorization here
and then the next one this one here this ten
to the fifteen plus twenty three that's rather
curious because the prime that's involved here
is three zero three zero three zero three zero
three zero three zero three one that seems
rather strange and then we get you know some
kind of patterns of course the primes get bigger
but there seems to be quite a propensity to have
suddenly big primes we find there is another
big prime there another one there another one
there there's always some pretty decently big
primes here this pair of bigger primes here we
have quite a few smallish factors and bigger prime
here a few small factors and then a bigger prime
and I guess we observed these other factors the
patterns of 11s every second is appearing again
how about forty ones yeah there's a forty one
there and another forty one there it appears to
be some kind of regularity with the forty ones
and maybe we've seen other ones - there's a 13
there and a 13 there there's a 17 there and there
anymore 17s I can't see any but certainly there's
this idea that once a prime is on the list then it
will carry on appearing at regular intervals and
you might like to think about why or first of all
is that true and if so why that's a nice exercise
to think about you know what kind of patterns
there might be in this this list it's obviously
not entirely random but there might be some
interesting structure and things to observe for
example one might like to explain you know why is
this thing appearing it's not just our coincidence
or is it somehow related to the numbers here
let's carry out a little bit with some higher
ones okay so we're not going to go through all the
powers here but say multiples of 10 at this point
so 10 to the 30 plus 23 we have this thing here
they're big Prime they're 10 to the 40 plus 23 a
few small ones and then to biggish ones 10 to the
50 plus 23 this times this times now this one here
is all one big Pronk if there's no multiplication
sign it means that this is a wraparound so that's
all one very big bran 10 to the 60 plus 23 we
have this factor of medium-sized one and then a
long one all the way up there 10 to the 70 plus
23 a few factors and then medium-sized one and
then another medium-sized one and then another
medium-sized one and then a bigger one okay and
just a few more 10 to the 80 plus 23 a few small
factors a medium-sized one and then a very long
one and then 10 to the 90 plus 23 there's a few
smaller ones and we end up with a few quite a few
medium-sized ones 10 to the 100 plus 23 this is
one that actually defeats me and my computer my
computer spends an hour to try to work this
out and doesn't seem to be able to do it but
this particular factorization thanks to Giorgio
cornelio who offered it up in this comment to my
famous math problems one where I basically asked
for the same kind of problem so here we have a
couple of factors and then we have this thing
up here and then followed by this rather long
prime so how big are these ones that's maybe a
10 20 30 about 30 or so for the first prime at
10 20 30 40 around 50 or 60 digits for the second
prime okay I think it's interesting even just to
look at this kind of pattern I mean it's a way
of accessing some interesting things that former
generations had no possibility of doing you know
so gauss would have loved to have a computer to be
able to investigate factorizations like this and i
think it's great that we can do this and i think i
want to encourage people to think of it as a an
empirical kind of domains like we're botanists
and we're you know on a new island there's all
these interesting species and things to look at
and observe and gather data and and and stare at
things and try to try to make some patterns and
theories there's probably relatively interesting
observations to be made here maybe some that are
on the surface but maybe some that are deeper down
and so maybe some of you who are programmers might
like to program you know what these kinds of
particular numbers factor to go through these
exponents one by one to make a list of a couple
hundred or a thousand of them so that we can
sort of stare at things and see what happens but
I think we can see at least some features that are
going to point very clearly to my main claim ok
so my claim is that as we up this exponent here ok
the problem is that we're getting these big primes
and this thing here is relatively small complexity
ok it's only you know the complexity of less than
10 but the primes that we're getting are high
complexity it's very unlikely that this prime here
for example has complexity that's significantly
less than 60 and if we jack up this exponent here
who replaces the hundred by a thousand or by ten
thousand or by a million or by a billion well we
can expect this to to really blow out on us that
these things here on the left-hand side are very
compact and concise they have low complexity but
they're factorizations involve high complexity
so the process of factoring sort of blows out
in complexity that's the central problem that's
the essential problem why Zed is not going to be
factorizable because although we can write Z
very compactly there is no way we're gonna be
able to write the various primes that appear
in its factorization even if it had one in a
reasonably concise way they're going to be these
things that look like this but this is just baby
stuff compared to what we can expect as we jack up
this exponent here and you can see there's even a
huge distance to go from a factor or an exponent
of a hundred here to an exponent of ten triangle
might that's what's involved with zit okay there's
this this whole thing is going to just blow up on
us and where it does so it's hard to say you know
I mean our computing powers are definitely going
to get more impressive and years to come we'll
be able to go further than we can now so it's
not possible to say we'll be able to go up to this
point and no further okay but we can confidently
say that we're not going to be able to get to
Zed we're just not going to be able to factor Zed
that's just the reality of the mathematical world
that we live in it doesn't matter whether we like
it or we don't like it that's just the way things
are but that doesn't mean that we should give up
on Zed Zed is still very interesting to study even
if we cannot arrive at a full picture of it that's
okay so we know already that Zed does have some
prime factors joel sugar and other people have
found them up to a certain point so we know it has
factors three thirteen one three nine six seven
318 301 four hundred thousand one hundred nine
and this one two seven nine nine seven three seven
three and then of course there's some quotient and
we have not a very good idea of that quotient now
I think it's a major challenge for us to find more
prime factors of Zed and this is a challenge this
is a mathematical challenge that will live through
the ages okay so long after most of the standard
problems that you know about in mathematics the
Riemann hypothesis and you know the twin prime
conjecture and P equals NP long after those things
are solved and completely settled this will still
be an open problem an endless amount of work can
be directed into this effort of course it'll get
harder and harder as we go I mean eventually
people will find very very big problems and
they'll be humongously difficult to find even one
more okay but no doubt there will be big prizes
and you know centuries to come to find more and
more factors and said am i right mathematicians of
the future okay so this can be tackled by modular
arithmetic so we can look for prime factors by
ideas of modular arithmetic of divisibility
but that's different and additional to actually
computing commotions so after we've say found a
certain number of factors at some point we want to
say well okay what is their remainder that we have
left so this is another interesting aspect of this
story is how do we get control over the quotients
it's really a question of how much complexity is
there when we divide one natural number by another
and this kind of thing was investigated by Euler
and we're going to have to look at some Oilers
thinking in this direction it'll be an interesting
way of shedding light on the complexity that that
we get that blows up in this quotient business so
to summarize as we find more and more factors of
said what's gonna happen is that the complexity
of the quotients are going to blow out that's
what's going to stop us these things are gonna
get more and more complicated and ultimately
they're gonna get too big to write down in
our universe and we're no longer gonna have them
we'd have them up to a certain point and at some
point they just go beyond us and it's important to
realize that this is a problem not intrinsically
about the limitations of our computers okay it's
not about that it's really about a limitation with
the universe itself the universe itself does not
have enough space or power or time to factor Zed
this problem of factoring that is too big for
the world in which we live in so it it's not
intrinsically about our computers it's important
to realize that it's not a computational problem
in that sense so it's very interesting stuff
so we are going to in a future video talk about
this quotient story and look at oil Ernest
contributions here but I think it's an apt
time to pause and have a little bit of celebration
so in my next video I want to actually celebrate
this 200 video mark and talk a little bit more
expansively and generally about what I envision
for the future of this series as we boldly go
forth to try to set mathematics on a proper much
more solid foundation I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening